---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

Programming is one of the most rewarding activities you could become engaged in.
It is one of the best things I have ever learned and I think that learning to
program is for everyone. Before we dive in and discuss what this course is all
about I want to encourage you to watch a video that I really enjoy.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/BjKmWk3oE4E" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

&nbsp;

## Getting Started

### My Model

This course will not have a scheduled class time where I lecture and you listen.
Instead, I have prepared a number of lecture videos and documents for you to
watch and read. These will take the place of lectures and should teach you
everything you need to know to complete the homework assignments.

I understand that everyone learns differently so I apologize if this model isn't
your preferred method of learning. My reason for this model is that I want
people to be able to learn at their own pace and not feel left behind if they
miss class or held back if they are hungry for more.

I still want to have some face time with the students so I will be making myself
available on a weekly basis for anyone to come and ask me questions in person.


### Our Environment

We are going to learn to program using the [Python
language](https://www.python.org/).  There are different environments that you
can use to program in but we are going to use a
[cloud](http://www.howtogeek.com/howto/32016/what-is-cloud-computing-and-what-does-this-stupid-buzzword-mean/)
environment called Koding. You will need to create a free account on Koding so
that you will have an environment to program in. Go ahead and click the link
below to sign up.

**_[Sign up for Koding](https://koding.com/)_**

This course will have a number of videos and I will be using Koding as my
programming environment. So unless you feel really comfortable using something
different than what we will all be using in class, I would encourage you to use
Koding.

### Our Book

This is a stand-alone course and you will not need to read a book to learn the
material but I know that many people learn better from reading. I have,
therefore, provided a book that I think is extensive and appropriate for the
topics we will be learning. The book is free and has an online copy. Check it
out at the link below.

**_[A Byte of Python](http://www.swaroopch.com/notes/python/)_**

You can also purchase a hard copy if you are more into that. Since I don't have
a hard copy I will not be able to give page numbers. So you are on your own.

**_[Purchase A Byte of
Python (Optional)](http://www.lulu.com/shop/swaroop-c-h/a-byte-of-python/paperback/product-21142968.html)_**

I will provide links to appropriate portions of the text as they apply. You may
read them if you wish. It is often nice to learn from multiple sources so I
encourage you to do so but it is not required. You will see links to the online
text throughout this course that look like:

<span><i class="fa fa-book"></i><a href="http://www.swaroopch.com/notes/python/"> The Book</a></span>


### Experiments

Programming is learned through experimentation and repetition. When talking to
computers you must be very precise. There are things I have learned that I
continue to Google because I forgot the exact syntax and need to be reminded.
Because we learn by doing I will encourage you to take breaks from the lessons
to try out a few of the things that you are learning. I call these experiments
and will prompt you with the following indicator:

<span><em><i class="fa fa-flask"></i> Try it out!</em></span>


### The Syllabus

The main purpose of this class is teach the basics of creating computer
programs. It is not to teach about using computers. Basic computer knowledge is
a pre-requisite for this class. 

Lessons will be broken up into various principles. Completing a lesson will
consist of watching the required videos and reading the lesson documentation for
each principle and then completing the homework assignment(s).

The homework assignments will typically be programming assignments or question
and answers. There is, of course, no grading associated with these assignments.
I will be available on a weekly basis to discuss any problems you may experience
with the lessons or the assignments. You will turn in the question and answer
homework through email and you will submit the programming assignments through
GitHub. You will, therefore, need a GitHub account. Click on the link below to
setup an account. 

**_[Setup a GitHub account](https://github.com/join)_**

I will not discuss how to use GitHub here because the first lesson covers that.

To see more details about lessons and assignments check out the syllabus. Click
the link below:

**_[Syllabus](/syllabus)_**

### My Availability

I will be available weekly:

* Where: [Pleasant Grove Library](http://www.plgrove.org/library/)
* Day: Saturday
* Time: 10:30 a.m. - 12:00 p.m.

I will be answering questions so please come and get help. I am also available
to answer questions by email. My email address is found at the bottom of every
page on this site. You can also learn more about me at my website.

**_[My Website](http://reedcwilson.com)_**
