---
layout: post
title:  "For Loops"
date:   2016-01-05 19:22:15
categories: 
---

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ldX3jKGFA14" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
&nbsp;

### The For Loop

For loops are a mechanism to repeat something *for* a certain number of times.
For loops  provide us with a different way of thinking about looping. We get to
define a fixed end as part of the statement. Just like a while loop and an if
statement, For loops are blocks. They begin with the for **keyword** and are
followed by a **variable declaration**. There is then the in **keyword** and
then a **list**. It is completed with a **colon** and then the body of the loop
is **indented**. We haven't covered lists yet so till then you are going to
learn about and use a special function called `range()` that creates lists. 

{% highlight python %}
for num in range(1,11,1):
    print num
{% endhighlight %}

<span><i class="fa fa-book"></i><a href="http://python.swaroopch.com/control_flow.html#the-for-loop"> For Loops</a></span>

One thing to note from this loop is that the variable declaration `num` that we
made in the loop can be used **within** the block. Python lets you use it
**outside** of the block but in my opinion this is bad. The reason why is
because what if you had a loop like this:

{% highlight python %}
for num in range(0, 0, 0):
    print num
print num
{% endhighlight %}

The print statement that is outside of the block would fail because we never
initialize the `num` variable since there were no iterations. It would work if
you had any iterations (eg. `range(0, 1, 1)`). This is inconsistent and something that most other
programming languages disallow. You should never expect the variables that you
initialize inside of a block to exist because if you never actually looped, then
they won't.

<span><em><i class="fa fa-flask"></i>Try running the for loops above with both of the range functions I have shown! One should work and the other should fail!</em></span>

### The Range Function

The `range()` function returns a list of numbers and takes three arguments: 

1. the starting number in the list 
2. the terminating number that all numbers in the list will be less than
3. the step number. 

For example `range(1, 10, 2)` would return `[1, 3, 5, 7, 9]`.  And `range(0, 10,
1)` would return `[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]`.  We use this function in the
`for` loop to give us a list of items to
[iterate](http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/iterate).

<span><em><i class="fa fa-flask"></i>Try writing a loop that prints all of the
multiples of 3 less than 50!</em></span>


### For vs While

Notice that if we were to do the same thing as our example for loop using a
while loop it would look like:

{% highlight python %}
num = 1
while num < 11:
    print num
    num += 1
{% endhighlight %}

The for loop is a much better fit because we have a fixed *number* of times we
wish to [iterate](http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/iterate). This doesn't
mean that a while loop isn't as good. They simply are better at different
things. You might recall that in the While loop lesson I challenged you to
create a program that continued to ask `"Why?"` until the user answered with
`"just because!"`. That kind of loop isn't really possible with a for loop. 

To know when to use a certain kind of loop try saying aloud how you want to
loop. If you end up saying something like, "I want to loop **for** as many times
as there are ..." then you probably want a for loop. If you say something like,
"I want to keep printing "You're wrong" **until** they get the right answer, or
**while** their answer isn't right" then you probably want a while loop.


### Infinite Loops

For loops don't typically have the same problem with infinity as while loops.
The reason is because your terminating condition is often better defined.
Infinite loops can still happen and that is when you add to the loop you are
iterating while you are looping over it. Imagine I have a list: `[1, 2, 3, 4,
5]` that I am iterating. Before the first iteration I have 5 numbers to go
through. If I add `6` to the list during the first iteration then my list will
be: `[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]`. I just used `1` so the remaining number of items in my
list is 5... Uh oh! We still have the same number of iterations. If we were to
continue adding numbers in every iteration, then we would never reach 0. This is
an infinite loop. Since you are going to be using the `range()` function for all
of your for loops you won't run in to this problem but remember when we do learn
about lists that you shouldn't add to the list you are looping over.
